Welcome back to the course where we will discuss
shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs.
In this chapter we've seen shortest path
algorithms that work with directed acyclic
graphs, then why are we having this lecture?
It's because with directed acyclic graphs,
we have an algorithm that is faster than
ones we've seen, so it's good to know it.
Let's suppose that we have this situation,
we want to calculate the shortest distance
to reach the vertex K from the vertex A. K has 3
vertices that are going to it, vertices H I and J.
Imagine that we know the shortest distance to go
from A to each one of H I and J, the distance to H
is 28, the distance to I is 34, and the distance
to J is 37. By the way the grey area contains
other vertices of the graph, it's just that we
don't care about them for this example, we don't
need to know how we got these shortest distances
to H I and J, just pretend that we have them.
Starting from these information, can
you calculate the shortest distance
to go to K? Take some seconds to think about it.
K has 3 incoming neighbors H I and J, so we
know that the shortest path will either pass
from H or I or J before reaching K, they
are the only vertices that can go to K.
So we have 3 scenarios, we either go to H with
a minimum distance then take the edge to K,
or go to I then take the edge to K,
or go to J then take the edge to K.
Let's calculate the total distance
with each situation and compare.
We know that the minimum distance to go to
H is 28, +13 for the edge to K we get 41.
We also know that the minimum distance to go
to I is 34, +5 for the edge to K we get 39.
And for J, the minimum distance to go to
it is 37, +10 for the edge to K we get 47.
We have these 3 choices, we obviously take
the one with the shortest total distance, 39.
So the shortest path to go to K is the shortest
path to go to I then we take the last edge,
the one from I to K. You can see that
by knowing the shortest distance to go
to each incoming neighbor of K, we could
know the shortest distance to go to K.
The shortest distance to go to K is the
minimum between the shortest distance to
go to H + the weight of the edge from H to K, and
the shortest distance to go to I + the weight of
the edge from I to K, and the shortest distance
to go to J + the weight of the edge from J to K.
In a general way, the shortest distance
to go from source to a vertex v,
is the minimum between the shortest
distance to go from source to u + the
weight of the edge from u to v, for
each u in incoming neighbors of v.
We can think of applying this
formula for each vertex and
we're done. But a condition to apply it
to a vertex v is that, as you could see,
we need to already have the shortest distance to
each one of its incoming neighbors, distances of
incoming neighbors are like prerequisites
to be able to calculate the actual one.
Which is not always the case if we don't follow
the right order. For example here if we start
with L, we don't know the shortest distance to its
incoming neighbors H and I, so we can't calculate.
What's the right order then? What's the
order that guarantees that for each vertex v,
we will have traversed its incoming
neighbors before, to be able to calculate.
It's the topological order, remember that
in a topological order, for each edge (u,v),
u comes before v. And this is what we're searching
for, we want that if u is an incoming neighbor
of v, then we traverse u before traversing v,
which is guaranteed by the topological order.
So the strategy is that we're given a
graph, we compute the topological ordering,
and we traverse vertices in that order while
applying this formula, dist[v] is equal to the
minimum of values dist[u]+weight of edge from
u to v, such that u is an in-neighbor of v.
Let's do it with this graph. We want distances
from D to each vertex, D is the source.
The topological sort algorithm returns this order.
Now we initially put infinity for all values
dist[u], as we did in Dijkstra and Bellman-Ford
for example. Then we set dist[source] to 0,
here source is D. We start traversing. The first
vertex is A. It has no in-neighbors, so its dist
value doesn't change, it remains infinity. Then
we have C, same thing, doesn't change, infinity.
Then G, same thing. Then B, it has one
in-neighbor, A. So dist[B] will be the
min between dist[A]+w(A,B) and, and that's it we
have only one choice, B has only one in-neighbor.
dist[A] is infinity, + 3 we get
infinity, it's the value of dist[B].
But wait we're getting infinity for all values,
is it normal? Yes, because if you notice,
D can go to neither A, nor C, nor G, nor
B, so it's normal to have infinity in dist.
Values will start changing when we'll be
on vertices that D can reach, like E and H.
Next vertex, D. D is the source, we don't
touch it, it remains 0. Then we have E. E has 4
in-neighbors, A B C and D. So dist[E] will be the
minimum between dist[A]+w(A,E), dist[B]+w(B,E),
dist[C]+w(C,E), and dist[D]+w(D,E). dist[A]+w(A,E)
is infinity+5, infinity. dist[B]+w(B,E)
is infinity+6, infinity.
dist[C]+w(C,E) is infinity+1,
infinity. And dist[D]+w(D,E) is 0+3,
3. The minimum is 3, so dist[E] is 3.
And we're sure that shortest distance to E is 3
because it cannot change later, we already have
shortest distance to all its in-neighbours
and we took the minimum of dist[u]+w(u,E).
Then we have F, it has only one in-neighbor,
C, so its dist value will be dist[C]+w(C,F),
which is infinity. Then we have H,
it has two in-neighbors D and E.
dist[H] will be min between dist[D]+w(D,H) and
dist[E]+w(E,H). Which is min between 0+7 and 3+2,
min between 7 and 5, which is 5. Then we
have J, it has only one in-neighbor, G,
so its dist value will be dist[G]+w(G,J),
which is infinity. Then we have I. It has
two in-neighbors H and F, so dist[I] will be
min between shortest distance to go to H or
F + the weight of the edge that takes us to I,
which is min between infinity and 9, we get 9.
After it, we have K, it has two in-neighbors H
and J, we get min between 9 and infinity, it's 9.
Last vertex, L. It has two in-neighbors H
and I, we have min between dist[H]+w(H,L)
and dist[I]+w(I,L), which is min between 5+9
and 9+1, min between 14 and 10, we get 10.
We finished traversing vertices of the ordering,
we got all shortest distances with D as a source.
And we got a lot of infinity values
because D cannot reach those vertices.
Let's implement this solution. We take as
parameters the graph and the source vertex.
We compute the topological ordering with
the function we made in topsort chapter,
either the one based on dfs or the one based on
bfs. If we get an empty array, then there is a
cycle, the graph is not acyclic, we cannot
work on it, we return None, invalid input.
If there is no problem, we can start working.
Later we will need to traverse in-neighbors,
while our adjacency list contains out-neighbors.
So we build the transpose graph to be able to
directly read in-neighbors. Once it's done,
we create dist table, with infinity as a
default value. And we put 0 is dist[src].
Now we start traversing vertices v of
the ordering. For each one of them,
we want to find the in-neighbor u that
gives the smallest value dist[u]+w(u,v).
Except if it's the source, because we don't touch
the source, we already have its final dist value,
and if it doesn't have in-neighbors.
This is why we start by making sure
that v is different from source, and
has in-neighbors, in other words,
the length of its in-neighbors array, that we
get from the transpose graph, is greater than 0.
If conditions are respected, we get the min
among in-neighbors, which are in tgraph[v].
As key we put dist[u]+w(u,v), we need
the key to precise the way we want to
compare in-neighbours, we want the tuple (u,
w) that produces the smallest value dist[u]+w.
After we found it, we assign the
value to dist[v], which is dist[u]+w.
After doing so for all vertices, we return
dist. And we can even add prev to be able to
reconstruct the path later, for that we create
prev with null as a default value, and when we
find the min in-neighbour of v, we also set it as
its prev, we assign u to prev[v]. And we return
dist and prev. To reconstruct, we use the same
function we used in Dijkstra and Bellman-Ford.
What about the time complexity? First
we have the topological sort algorithm,
it costs O(|V|+|E|) as
explained in topsort lectures.
We also have |V|+|E| to build the transpose
graph. Then we're traversing |V| vertices.
For each one of them, we're traversing all
its in-neighbors, the cost is in-degree(v).
The total is O(|V|+|E|) + O(|V|+|E|) +
|V| + sum of in-degrees of all vertices.
The sum of in-degrees of vertices of a graph is
|E|, so we get an O(|V|+|E|) time complexity.
Which is faster than algorithms we
studied before. But, as you know,
this algorithm works for directed
acyclic graphs only, so if you have
a DAG, use this fast algorithm,
otherwise use another algorithm.
And for this same problem, single-source shortest
path with weighted directed acyclic graphs,
we have another approach. If you
remember, in Dijkstra's algorithm,
we were traversing vertices one by
one, each vertex was traversed once.
And once we reach a vertex in Dijkstra's, we
consider that we found its shortest distance,
because we traversed all vertices that
can produce the shortest distance to it.
So what did we do? We traversed outgoing edges
and we attempted to relax them, we traversed
outgoing edges (v, w), and for each one of
them, if dist[u]+w was smaller than dist[v],
we were updating dist[v] by dist[u]+w, and
putting u in prev[v]. For this second approach,
we will do the same thing, the only difference
will be in determining the order of traversal.
In Dijkstra's, we were using a priority queue
from where we were extracting the vertex with
the highest priority at each iteration. But with a
directed acyclic graph, we don't need all of that,
we already have the order, the one we
get from topological sort algorithm.
So we just traverse vertices u of
the ordering, for each one of them,
we try to relax outgoing edges. We traverse
outgoing edges (v, w), and if dist[u]+w is
smaller than dist[v], we update dist[v] by
dist[u]+w, and put u in prev[v], that's it.
And we don't need the transpose graph
here, we're traversing out-neighbors,
which are already present in the adjacency list of
the graph. Here's what happens with our example.
You can see that we got the same
result, both approaches work.
For the time complexity, we have O(|V|+|E|)
for topological sort, we traverse |V| vertices,
for each one of them we traverse outgoing
edges, the cost is out-degree(u).
In total, we have O(|V|+|E|)
+ |V| + sum of out-degrees.
The sum of out-degrees of vertices of a graph
is |E|, so we get an O(|V|+|E|) time complexity,
same as the first approach. We've reached
the end of this lecture, I hope that you
understood the presented material, ask questions
if you didn't, and see you in the next lecture.